
    
08/27/1988 

DR ISAAC ASIMOV 
TALKS WITH 
SLAWEK WOJTOWICZ



Slawek Wojtowicz © 1988



SW: If you ask any SF fan in Poland "who is Isaac Asimov?" he or she will answer 
without any hesitation - "one of the greatest SF writers in the World". You 
might be surprised to learn that you are so famous in a country where only a 
small fraction of your works has been translated into the native language and 
the majority of people cannot read English. But an average Polish fan wouldn't 
be able to say much about Isaac Asimov as a person. What could you tell us about 
your life? 
IA: Well, I was born in the Soviet Union in 1920, came to the United States with 
my family in 1923 and lived in New York since. I got my Ph.D. at Columbia 
University in 1948. I'm married and have two children from my first marriage. I 
started reading Science-Fiction when I was nine years old. I sold my first story 
when I was eighteen and my first book when I was thirty. Since then I have 
published 394 books. I have twenty five other books in press. Some of these are 
mysteries, some are children' books, others are on straight science, literary 
subjects, humor, mythology - on everything I can think of. 
SW: Can you tell us how your day time schedule looks like? 
IA: This morning I did my weekly science column for the "Los Angeles Times" 
Syndicate. I'm working on a novel - it is little over half finished in first 
draft. Pretty soon it will be time to write my monthly essay for "Fantasy and 
Science Fiction". I'm writing a big "History of Science" and I've got up to 
1945, so it is only little over forty years left, but they were very hard forty 
years... So I've got lots of work. 
SW: Do you have any time left for other things besides writing? 
IA: All I do is write. I do practically nothing else, except eat, sleep and talk 
to my wife. 
SW: Is it a secret what are you working on now? 
IA: The novel is called "Nemesis". It is not a part of any other series I'm 
doing - it is not as "Foundation" nor robot novels. It's something completely 
different. 
SW: What are your plans for the future? What topics are you going to explore? 
IA: I don't have any specific plans. I just keep turning out novels. Often 
publishers ask me to do something and that's how I know what I'll do next. 
SW: Have you ever written any screenplays for SF movies? 
IA: No, I'm no talent for that and I don't want to get mixed up with Hollywood. 
If they are going to do something of mine, they will have to find someone else 
to write the screenplays. 
SW: Have you heard about any plans concerning screenplays for "Foundation" 
novels? 
IA: Oh, every once a while somebody talks about doing it, but so far nobody has 
ever managed to dig up enough money for it. 
SW: Do you like the covers of your books? Do you have any input in their design? 

IA: No, I don't have any input into that. Publishers take care of that entirely. 
They never ask any questions and I never offer any advice, because my artistic 
talent is zero. 
SW: Do you have a favorite SF painter? 
IA: Well, there is a number of painters that I like very much. To name just a 
few: Michael Whelan and Boris Vallejo are between my favorites. I'm impressed by 
them, but that doesn't necessarily mean anything - I don't know that I have any 
taste in art. 
SW: Have you ever tried to paint something yourself? 
IA: No, I can't even draw a straight line with a ruler. 
SW: What do you think about current trends in SF? 
IA: Well, to tell you the truth, I was brought up in an earlier, simpler day and 
I have never broken away. In other words, the novels I write in nineteen 
eighties are very much like the novels I wrote in forties and fifties - they 
tend to be a little old fashioned. Fortunately the readers read them anyway... 
SW: Do you like Fantasy? Tolkien stories? 
IA: I like Tolkien himself - I've read it five times. I don't read much these 
days, honestly. When you write as much as I do, you don't have enough time for 
reading. Oddly enough, when I do read, I tend to reach for murder mystery and I 
look for old fashioned murder mysteries. I'm a very old fashioned person... 
SW: What about comic strips? Would you agree with an opinion that this is also 
art? 
IA: Yes, it is. I don't have anything to do with it, but if somebody wanted to 
convert one of my stories into a comic strip, I'd only ask that it be a good 
one. That's all. 
SW: What sort of SF do you like most? 
IA: What I like most is rather old fashioned science-fiction. I find it 
difficult to understand modern stylistic experimentation, so, I'm afraid, I look 
for simple stories of the kind I write myself. 
SW: Most of the readers are also looking for this kind of writing... 
IA: I'm glad if they are, because they can find it in my stories and I will be 
able to make a living. 
SW: Do you have any favorite SF writers? 
IA: My favorite is Arthur Clark. I also like people like Fred Pohl or Larry 
Niven and others who know their science. I like Harlan Ellison, too, although 
his stories are terribly emotional. But I don't consider myself a judge of good 
science-fiction - not even my own. 
SW: What about mainstream writers? 
IA: Mainstream writers I don't read much of, I'm afraid. I read mostly 
non-fiction: new books on science, mathematics, things like that. Most of the 
stuff I write, except for my novels, is non-fiction. I have to keep up with 
science. And that is most of my reading. 
SW: Do you have any vision of what the near future of Mankind has in store? 
IA: I have several - some bad, some good, depending on what we do. I can see a 
computerized world, with robots doing most of the dull work or a space centered 
world with people moving out into orbit about the Earth and reaching the 
asteroids. But I can also see a polluted world in which the quality of life 
sinks and one in which there is a nuclear war and we destroy ourselves. There is 
nothing that MUST be, everything depends entirely on what we decide to do. 
Naturally I would like to see Civilization to continue and improve. I think 
everyone would. But still, people tend to do things that harm Humanity. 
SW: When I wrote in my letter that it is great to live in the world advanced 
fifty years in time (comparing Eastern Europe and the United States) you 
disagreed... Why? 
IA: Well, you can always catch up with technology. One hundred years ago Japan 
put a mind to it and caught up to Western Europe. When there is a model to 
follow it is easy. However advancing, as we do, means also that we probably 
pollute the environment more than any other nation does and we use up more 
resources more wastefully. These things are not particularly admirable. Not all 
"advancement" is advancement. 
SW: Who do you think will be the next president of the United States? Will this 
be good or bad for the United States? 
IA: Oh, that I can't say. I know who I'm voting for - I'm voting for Dukakis. 
But I vote Democratic all the time. Sometimes I win, sometimes I don't. I'll 
vote Democratic this time. 
SW: If you were to choose a place and time to live in, when and where would you 
choose? And why? 
IA: It would be right now, right here. I'm used to this world. I know how to get 
along in it and it has some things in it I don't want to give up - like modern 
medicine. Without it I would be dead now. My angina was very bad and I didn't 
think I had long to live. I've had a triple bypass surgery and now I feel 
fine... I had half of my thyroid taken out sixteen years ago, because it was 
cancerous. If not for that I'd probably be dead by now. That's why I don't look 
towards a simpler life without antibiotics, without modern surgery, anesthetics 
etc. In this simpler life in the Past there are also slaves. Who knows? I might 
have been a slave. So I'll take it right now, with all its faults. 
SW: What do you think is the most difficult barrier to overcome in figuring out 
the methods of interstellar travel? 
IA: The most insurmountable is the speed of light limit. As long as we can't go 
faster than the speed of light we can't reach any but the nearest stars in our 
lifetime. In a case of speeds close to the speed of light it may seem to the 
people who are traveling that in less than lifetime they can reach a distant 
galaxy. But here, on Earth, millions of years will pass - so that they'll never 
be able to come back to their own world. And I'm afraid there is no way of 
beating that... 
SW: In your novels people are traveling faster than light... 
IA: That's true! But that's in the novel. You must never confuse your dreams 
with reality. It is easy to dream and it is fun to dream. But if you actually 
think that reality is got to fit your dreams, then I'm afraid that you are not 
quite sane.... I'm sane. I know what is real and what is a dream. 
SW: Our perception and knowledge about this world is based on Einstein's General 
Relativity theories but these can be replaced in the future with better ones, 
just like Newton's theories were... 
IA: I know, and in my books I'm always careful to point out that there are 
things we don't know and that Einstein's General Relativity belongs to this 
Universe. Perhaps you can get out of this Universe. Perhaps there are deeper 
laws that we don't yet understand. Perhaps... I say all that, because I'm a good 
science-fiction writer and I don't just make things up without trying to justify 
them. But I don't really believe it. 
SW: Is it true that you don't like traveling? 
IA: I don't! I never take airplanes and I don't like to be away from home for 
long. It simplifies life - means that I turn down all invitations to travel long 
distances and I don't often travel short distances. I stay here with my 
typewriter, my books and my quiet life. And I like it. 
SW: So you wouldn't be able to attend our National Convention, Polcon, that will 
be held next December in Gdansk? 
IA: Sorry, I hardly ever attend them. I'm not going to New Orleans. I think next 
year it is going to be in Boston. I can make it to Boston. 
SW: If we were to organize the Worldcon in Gdansk, would you attend? 
IA: No, I'm afraid not. The only way I could go would be by ship and only if I 
had a time. But it is not very likely... So I'm terribly sorry. I would like to 
see Gdansk, after all it is the city where the World War II started and it is a 
very lively city right now. But I don't think I'll have a chance. 
SW: Do you know anything about the Polish Fandom? 
IA: Not a thing. You are my entire knowledge of it. 
SW: You might be familiar with the history of Poland... 
IA: Oh, yes! I know the history of the world generally. Yes! First partitions 
1772, second partitions 1793, third partitions 1795, Great Duchy of Warsaw under 
Napoleon, revolt in 1863 against Russia... I have it all. 
SW: What about our history before partitions? 
IA: Absolutely! I know Jadwiga and Jagiello getting married and Poland being a 
large country at that time and Jan Sobieski who saved Vienna in 1683... 
SW: Talking about history - do you believe in the theory of the "Wheel of 
History" - in other words, that people tend to repeat their mistakes over and 
over again? 
IA: Unfortunately they do. In many respects people don't learn from the past. 
They fight civil wars and always call the outside forces to help one side or the 
other. The outside forces help them and take over the country. Happens over and 
over again. And they never seem to learn the lesson. 
SW: Do you think the human species will change radically in the course of 
evolution? 
IA: Well, unfortunately that is almost impossible to predict. Right now, I 
think, the chances are that we wipe ourselves out before we'll have a chance to 
undergo any startling changes. Also, we've reached a stage where we change 
environment to suit ourselves, so there is less pressure to fit the changing 
environment. Secondly, now we can handle genetic engineering, so we might change 
ourselves without regard to the environment. Just change ourselves the way we 
want to, which may not always be wise. That's why I think we reached a point 
where things of the Future, as far as evolutionary changes are concerned, are 
absolutely unpredictable. 
SW: Do you think that some people might survive the nuclear war? 
IA: I hope it won't be me! Honestly I doubt that - I'm getting too old. But I 
think that people that will survive will be the unfortunate ones. After what we 
have done to the Earth, consuming its resources, destroying its forests, 
upsetting its soil, adding to that the effects of fallout, radioactivity, 
enormous fires, enormous deaths - so it may be impossible to rebuild in anything 
shorter than geologic ages... To be a part of a small group of human beings 
struggling along before the final curtain is no great pleasure... 
SW: I've never heard about any story written by you with an action set in the 
past... 
IA: That is true. And the reason for that is that I've never been able to find a 
time to do the necessary research. Jean Auel who wrote the "Clan of the Cave 
Bear" and "Mammoth Hunters", did a lot of research first and put years of work 
into it. That's why all my fiction is set either in the present or in the 
future. And if it's set in the present it's a present I know about. I don't look 
for exotic locations - all my murder stories take place in New York. 
SW: Have you noticed that there are many similarities between the Roman Empire 
and the United States? 
IA: One can think up things like that. I've often thought, for instance, that 
Nazi Germany took the place of Sparta in Europe and I've had a little fun during 
World War II trying to compare the European situation with that in an ancient 
Greece in the time of Peloponnesian War and to see if I can explain what 
happened now, what happened then... History is so complex that you can do it in 
thousand different ways. Toynbee tried to show that all these different 
civilizations follow the same pattern, and I think, he failed. He chose the 
pattern that the Classical Civilization used and then forced over rest into it. 
So while he was popular in his time, now he is dismissed as someone who didn't 
really succeed. 
SW: In your last novel "Prelude to Foundation" I found many characters and 
situations unique to the United States. Would you agree? 
IA: You have to understand that the only culture I know and I'm at home with is 
the United States. I can't really use another cultures as my model, because I 
simply don't know enough about them. How much ever I know about Polish history 
it's all from reading. I've never lived in Poland, I've never experienced Polish 
culture. If I tried to present future society that has similarities to present 
day Polish culture, anyone who was in Poland would laugh! So I don't try. It is 
important to know what you can do. 
SW: Don't you think that "Prelude" is much more food oriented than your past 
novels? 
IA: Is much more what oriented?! 
SW: Food oriented... 
IA: I didn't notice that! But it is possible! Not on purpose though. If it 
happened, it just happened. Now when I think of it - might be. I was anxious to 
show different cultures and one way in which you can show a different culture is 
by the different things they eat, whether they eat alone or with people, you 
know, things like that. I can't talk very much about things like art or sport 
because I know nothing about them but like everybody else I eat. 
SW: And what is your favorite kind of cooking? 
IA: Well, let's see now... I'm in a constant struggle to keep my weight down and 
one of the reasons is that I love virtually all food. I like Chinese, French and 
Italian cooking, as well as Polish sausages... I don't know what a typical 
Polish meal is but if someone feed me one, I'd probably love it! So there you 
are. Oh, I also eat in Russian restaurants - we have here in New York all kinds 
of different ethnic restaurants and my wife and I, we know a large number of 
them. 
SW: What about the "junk food"? 
IA: She won't let me. I love hamburgers, hot dogs, all that stuff - I'd gladly 
eat it - but she won't let me. 
SW: Why is that? 
IA: Well, she wants to keep me alive. 
SW: Which character in your novels is, in your opinion, most closely associated 
with the type of person you are? 
IA: I suppose it would be Elijah Bailey in the "Caves of Steel", "Naked Sun" and 
"The Robots of Dawn". He is a person with virtues I wish I had and faults I know 
I have. 
SW: Do you believe there is a place in Mankind's immediate future for robots? 
IA: Yes, I think we are going, if we survive, to be developing robots and the 
robotic world of the future will be a little bit resembling the one I wrote 
about forty, Gee... almost fifty years ago. 
SW: What motivates you to keep writing novels? 
IA: One of the things that motivates me is that the readers seem to like them 
and I get innumerable letters saying: "will you write another novel ?", "please, 
write another novel", "we are waiting for another novel". Another thing is my 
publishers who tell me that they will kill me if I will not write another novel 
and the third is that I get a little money for it. I've got to make sure that if 
I'll die my wife and my children are well off. 
SW: Don't you find pleasure in writing? 
IA: True. But I enjoy my non-fiction more than fiction. And in fiction I enjoy 
mysteries more than science-fiction. The more I enjoy writing something 
particular - less money I get. So while I enjoy least writing science-fiction 
novels, I get most money for...science-fiction. What can I do? 
SW: Please, keep writing! 
IA: I will. 
SW: Thanks a lot for this interview! 
IA: Please, when you get back home, tell all the people in Gdansk and Poland 
that sometimes I wish I did travel, so I can meet my fans in Poland and indeed 
all over the world. But unfortunately the truth is I don' travel. So it has to 
be done this way, by the miracles of modern science: my voice in the recording 
device and someone traveling in a plane to come here and see me... 



|Return to the top|Slawek's writing | Slawek's Hobbies Page|Slawek's Home Page|





